---
title: "Premise and Purpose"
date: 2020-09-28T21:09:13
showDate: true
tags: ["definition", "epistemology"]
---

# A Start

In my attempts at curating a repository of admittedly amateur philosophical essays, I find myself fairly challenged when trying to form a pure foundation of premises and axioms. It seems to me that any philosophy must start with a consistent set of premises or at least an intuitively sound few axioms to work from. Otherwise, the goal must be to engage with or potentially critique the established work of another — at least in as much as something fruitful may come from compounding one's work on that of another. I'd like to combine the two, here. I'll use this initial post to define a few foundational thoughts I have, and in course of time, I'll provide my commentary, critique, or otherwise on the works of others.

# Refuting Initial Premises

Suppose I start with the axiom that *any thing cannot have come from nothing*, or rather, nothing (i.e., imagine some void, zero, or naught) cannot in any way yield an entity other than the void itself, maybe existing at some other time, or dimension. It is easy to think about this as the conservation of matter-energy, but I believe the concept can be extended to concepts, and conceptions.

But, what does that mean for philosophical arguments? Many great writers have attempted to reason their way to a conclusion from some axiom(s) we can all agree on, penultimately landing on a grand statement that might eventually change the way the world thinks. But, I believe that we neglect the first action taken by these writers, and that is we *start* by creating something from nothing, and write that action off when we arrive at our grand statement on Truth. *Cogito ergo sum*, or *any straight line segment can be extended indefinitely in a straight line*, or even *any thing cannot have come from nothing*! All of these axioms and postulates are begot from nothing: we simply accept them. Maybe our human minds require this sort of initiation to a logical argument. But, is it not possible or conceivable that in fact, a more useful — *potentially* more accurate — understanding of the universe (or even our world, or just your living room) is the consequence of some other "starting place"?

If we are going to talk Truth, I think we should lay more weight on the first action of creating our axioms from nothing. We should accept the (albeit counterintuitive) possibility that building an understanding of the universe from any initial statement could potentially be misled (though, unavoidably so). Our minds are not totally comprehensive, and we have a limited purview of "the way of things," such that we can explain every pixel of the film, but we'll never know the secrets behind the camera. With this in mind, I have to conclude I can only speak for what we experience, and only ever with a small dose of confidence in a vat of skepticism; after all, we can only ever base our conclusions on postulates which suffer from the incurable disease of Veil of Perception.
